**PANTHEON DIRECTORS** (14):   
*“These are the directors who have transcended their technical problems with a personal vision of the world.  To speak any of their names is to evoke a self-contained world with its own laws and landscapes.  They were also fortunate enough to find the proper conditions and collaborators for the full expression of their talent.”*

**WOODY ALLEN** (1935–	)

**FILMS:**  1966—What’s Up, Tiger Lily?  1969—Take the Money and Run.  1971—*Bananas*.  1972—Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex\* (\*But Were Afraid to Ask).  1973—*Sleeper*.  1975—*Love and Death*.  1977—*Annie Hall*.  1978—Interiors.  1979—*Manhattan*.  1980—Stardust Memories.  1982—A Midsummer Night’s Sex Comedy.  1983—*Zelig*.  1984—*Broadway Danny Rose*.  1985—*The Purple Rose of Cairo*.  1986—*Hannah and Her Sisters*.  1987—*Radio Days*, September.  1988—Another Woman.  1989—*Crimes and Misdemeanors*.  1990—Alice.  1991—Shadows and Fog.  1992—Husbands and Wives.  1993—Manhattan Murder Mystery.  1994—*Bullets over Broadway*.  1995—Mighty Aphrodite.  1996—Everyone Says I Love You.  1997—Deconstructing Harry.  1998—Celebrity.  1999—*Sweet and Lowdown*.  2000—Small Time Crooks.  2001—The Curse of the Jade Scorpion.  2002—Hollywood Ending.  2003—Anything Else.  2004—Melinda and Melinda.  2005—*Match Point*.  2006—Scoop.  2007—Cassandra’s Dream.  2008—*Vicky Cristina Barcelona*.  2009—Whatever Works.  2010—You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger.  2011—*Midnight in Paris*.  2012—To Rome with Love.  2013—*Blue Jasmine*.  2014—Magic in the Moonlight.  2015—Irrational Man.  2016—*Cafe Society*.  2017—Wonder Wheel.  2019—A Rainy Day in New York.  2020—Rifkin’s Festival.  2023—Coup de Chance.

Woody Allen is an anachronism.  For nearly half a century, he’s churned out an average of one film per year, a Ripken-like streak more typical of old Hollywood journeymen than prestigious contemporaries like Scorsese or Coppola. For some, Allen’s copious body of work is yet another strike against a filmmaker who ought to have been forced into retirement (if not tarred and feathered) decades ago. But no amount of critical re-evaluation can erase Allen’s monumental influence. His control is effortless and his tone timeless. No matter when it’s set or what it’s about, a Woody Allen picture is always nostalgic. His vision is evident from the first frame: Windsor font on a black card plainly announcing the credits as some old jazz artifact scratches over the soundtrack. It’s not much, but it casts a kind of spell that no other director can conjure in quite the same way.    
Allen is best remembered for the formal innovations of his ‘70s romantic comedies, but he reached the peak of his powers in the ‘80s. His best work from this era (ZELIG, THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO, RADIO DAYS) catalogues his various obsessions with the pop of the past: the songs, pictures, and people who inhabit his DNA.  ZELIG is perhaps the keystone to his entire career. Here, Allen plays out his boyhood fantasies, inserting himself (as the titular character) into archival footage to make it appear as though he were playing golf with Bobby Jones, chatting with Charlie Chaplin, shooting croquet with Carole Lombard. And he so lovingly communicates his adoration of this era that we swoon alongside him. The film is both a tribute to the unique wonders of American life (at one point an entranced Zelig rhapsodizes about baseball: “it doesn’t have to mean anything. I just think it’s beautiful”) and a satirical act of self-deprecating psychoanalysis. By the end, Zelig has risen to the top of high society, undergone a public scandal (with the requisite downfall) and won back the hearts and minds of the country through an act of inspiring entertainment. This is Allen at his best: prescient and self-aware, hilarious and genuinely moving.    
His strengths aren’t strictly technical (though he’s worked with superior technicians, including cinematographers Gordon Willis and Carlo di Palma and longtime editor Susan Morse) or thematic (though he’s tackled the same material as Shakespeare and Dostoevsky with unparalleled wit and complexity), but atmospheric. His magic lies in how casually he weds irony with sentiment, crass vulgarity with sophisticated wisdom. Romantic and cynical in equal measure, Allen is ultimately redeemed by his warmth and generosity to the audience, no matter how coldly it may receive him.    
    

**ROBERT ALTMAN** (1925–2006)

**FILMS:**  1957—The Delinquents.  1968—Countdown.  1969—That Cold Day in the Park.  1970—*M\*A\*S\*H*, *Brewster McCloud*.  1971—*McCabe & Mrs. Miller*.  1972—*Images*.  1973—*The Long Goodbye*.  1974—*California Split*, *Thieves Like Us*.  1975—*Nashville*.  1976—Buffalo Bill and the Indians, or Sitting Bull’s History Lesson.  1977—*3 Women*.  1978—A Wedding.  1979—Quintet, A Perfect Couple.  1980—Popeye, HealtH.  1982—Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean.  1983—*Streamers*.  1984—*Secret Honor*.  1985—Fool for Love, O.C. and Stiggs.  1987—Beyond Therapy.  1990—*Vincent & Theo*.  1992—*The Player*.  1993—*Short Cuts*.  1994—Pret-a-Porter.  1996—Kansas City.  1998—The Gingerbread Man.  1999—Cookie’s Fortune.  2000—Dr. T & the Women.  2001—*Gosford Park*.  2003—The Company.  2006—*A Prairie Home Companion*.

Is any director more aptly named than Robert Altman? The epitome of “alternative” cinema, his technique is as messy and textured as life itself. Blending naturalism with formalism is a dangerous game, but Altman has courted danger since his early days as a gun-for-hire on TV shows like *Bonanza* and *Combat\!* In his world, the facts live right next door to the farce, and even his dizziest sequences feel documentarian. Satirical and dead serious at the same time, an Altman film hints at deeper subtexts, meanings beyond meanings, like a joke that’s just over your head. His comic moments leave a sour aftertaste, but his most somber are never without a sense of humor.   
Although most famous for his overlapping sound design, his visual compositions are just as busy. He prefers movement over frequent cutting.  His camera is constantly swooping, panning, tilting, or zooming in and out of cluttered sets like an observer too voracious to focus on one thing at a time. “Altman’s films always seem full, somehow,” wrote Roger Ebert in his 1974 review of CALIFORNIA SPLIT. “We don’t have the feeling of an empty screen into which carefully drawn characters are introduced, but of a camera plunging into a boiling sea of frenzied human activity.” And yet, his pacing is far from hurried.  An Altman film doesn’t demand repeat viewings so much as casually invite them. And when you revisit one, you don’t feel rewarded so much as slyly acknowledged for noticing what was there all along.    
A consummate actor’s director, Altman’s theatrical tendencies are most apparent in the early ‘80s, when he adapted a string of small-scale stage plays. His most notable project from this period is SECRET HONOR, which depicts a fictionalized version of Richard Nixon reflecting on his life and career in one long, sweaty monologue. Philip Baker Hall’s breakthrough role (which Pauline Kael referred to as a great performance by “probably not a good actor”) now represents something of a pioneering feat: a sustained, heightened portrayal of a recent historical figure that doesn’t and isn’t meant to resemble an SNL caricature. With Altman’s patient assistance, Hall’s performance builds into a powerful reckoning of the political and personal circumstances that led to Nixon’s public downfall. Altman’s direction creates something riveting out of mundanity. Throughout Hall’s performance, Altman finds a million and a half ways to shoot him, cutting thoughtfully between a handful of props (including a microphone and set of CCTVs) to evoke a startling range of symbolic and thematic connotations. The cumulative effect compels us to re-evaluate not only our relationship with Nixon, but also the business of politics, the filmmaking process, the media’s ability to reveal and/or obfuscate the truth, the relentless scrutiny we apply to public figures, and the volatile psychological consequences of that scrutiny.    
This kind of film was a rarity in 1984, but is now seemingly the only kind most major actors and producers are interested in making. Oliver Stone took his cue from Altman when he made NIXON and W., but this style of filmmaking has taken on even more prominence in recent years, with filmmakers like Adam McKay and Jay Roach taking on figures like Roger Ailes, Dick Cheney, and Donald Rumsfeld in Oscar-nominated films like VICE and BOMBSHELL. The difference with SECRET HONOR is that unlike these other films, Altman’s approach is never less than sympathetic, even while retaining a sense of critical ruthlessness. “By all means, judge the man,” Altman seems to say. “Just make sure you understand him first.”  
Inevitably, Altman’s approach has at times yielded results too cumbersome for even the brawniest claims of artistic license to support. As is so often the case with great auteurs, Altman’s failures derive from the same characteristic that fuels his best work: his daredevilish compulsion to break formal boundaries in search of the sublime. Fittingly, BREWSTER MCCLOUD comes closest to explaining Altman’s persona, with its hero’s Icarus-like quest to buck the system while operating right under its nose (or, in this case, the rafters of the Astrodome). That the titular character falls to his death is a darkly sentient punchline given Altman’s eventual abandonment by critics and major studios after the spectacular failure of POPEYE. It’s a cliche to say “they don’t make ‘em like *that* anymore,” but in Altman’s case they never did and likely never will again.  

**JOEL & ETHAN COEN** (1954–	),  (1957–	)

**FILMS:**  1984—Blood Simple.  1987—Raising Arizona.  1990—*Miller’s Crossing*.  1991—*Barton Fink*.  1994—The Hudsucker Proxy.  1996—*Fargo*.  1998—*The Big Lebowski*.  2000—*O Brother, Where Art Thou?*  2001—The Man Who Wasn’t There.  2003—Intolerable Cruelty.  2004—The Ladykillers.  2007—*No Country for Old Men*.  2008—Burn After Reading.  2009—*A Serious Man*.  2010—True Grit.  2013—*Inside Llewyn Davis*.  2016—Hail, Caesar\!  2018—The Ballad of Buster Scruggs.  2021—The Tragedy of Macbeth.  2024—Drive-Away Dolls.

Coen films pay homage to classic Hollywood formality with a modern twist of irony and cruel humor. Elegant stylists and superior craftsmen who never sacrifice intelligence for entertainment value, the Coen Brothers emerged in the mid ‘80s as wily whiz kids from the Sam Raimi school of genre gymnastics. They refined their technique and deepened their ideas in the ‘90s, putting together perhaps the strongest directorial resume of the decade before petering out with the public in the early 00s. When they re-emerged as Academy darlings in 2007 with *No Country For Old Men*, it was as though critics thought we had lost them forever. Since then, the Coen Bros. have attained a kind of tenured master-in-residence status granted only Scorsese, Clint Eastwood, and Quentin Tarantino in today’s Hollywood.

Hawksian in their ability to direct across genres without diluting or degrading their signature tonality (a kind of literate, bone dry midwestern stoicism), they have dabbled in neo-noir, Westerns, screwball comedy, and period drama with reasonable success in all categories. Thematically, of course, they’re about as far from Hawks as you can get; Sarris characterized Howard Hawks as believing in “man \[as\] the measurer of all things,” but the Coens stress the absurdity of man’s puny plans at every turn. The only predictable thing in a Coen Bros movie is that whatever our heroes (or villains) aim to accomplish, God, Fate, or the forces of nature will inevitably conspire to make it the punchline of yet one more cosmic joke. 

**FRANCIS FORD COPPOLA** (1939–		)

**FILMS:**  1966—You’re a Big Boy Now.  1968—Finian’s Rainbow.  1969—The Rain People.  1972—*The Godfather*.  1974—*The Godfather Part II*, *The Conversation*.  1979—*Apocalypse Now*.  1982—One from the Heart.  1983—*The Outsiders*, *Rumble Fish*.  1984—The Cotton Club.  1986—Peggy Sue Got Married.  1987—Gardens of Stone.  1988—Tucker: The Man and His Dream.  1990—The Godfather Part III.  1992—*Bram Stoker’s Dracula*.  1996—Jack.  1997—The Rainmaker.  2007—Youth Without Youth.  2009—Tetro.  2011—Twixt.  2024—Megalopolis.

Coppola’s graceful, non-ironic approach to storytelling marks him as a stylistic descendant of John Ford, with a splash of Italian neorealism. But he’s the inverse of Ford if you consider the splintering of his career trajectory. If Coppola retired at the end of the 1970s, the decision to place him in the Pantheon would be a no-brainer. His emergence signalled the arrival of New Hollywood, which I’ll roughly define here as mainstream American filmmaking with a decidedly non-mainstream, European flair for self-expression. But the 80s and especially the 90s were not kind to Coppola’s legacy, and his cultural relevance since the turn of the century has been marginalized. But revisit any of his four 70s classics and you’ll be quickly assured that his standing amongst the Gods must endure.  *The Godfather* and its sequel remain, over 40 years later, perhaps the artistic pinnacle of popular American cinema. They also birthed the sequel slash franchise economy which dominates Hollywood even today.    
Player performance is key to Coppola’s technique; the iconic stature of figures like Pacino, Duvall, and Brando is largely due to their roles in his films. The other key is visual elegance; Gordon Willis’ chiaroscuro cinematography in *The Godfather* has come to epitomize the signature look of the 1970s, despite being worlds beyond the standard of that era (or any era since). Stills from that film are more reminiscent of Caravaggio or Edward Hopper than any contemporary filmmaker. Instead of close-ups or attention-grabbing camera moves, Coppola favors carefully composed master shots, a tendency that can perhaps be traced all the way back to his childhood interest in puppet theater as a way to pass the time while sick with polio and isolated in his bedroom.

**DAVID FINCHER** (1962–	)

**FILMS:**  1992—Alien 3\.  1995—*Seven*.  1997—The Game.  1999—*Fight Club*.  2002—Panic Room.  2007—*Zodiac*.  2008—The Curious Case of Benjamin Button.  2010—*The Social Network*.  2011—*The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo*.  2014—*Gone Girl*.  2020—Mank.  2023—The Killer.

David Fincher’s film career is an extension of the chip on his shoulder. Like the man himself, the tone of a Fincher film is incisive and sardonic, cynical and clinical. Though not a director of pure comedies, his jaded, embattled protagonists are frequently the victim of cruel jokes. Perhaps this reflects the director’s own disillusionment with an industry he’s disdained since he was granted the obstreperous opportunity to direct *Alien 3*, his since-disavowed feature debut. His creative battles with condescending studio bigwigs who saw him as simply a hired gun (a reputation he would ironically embrace and eventually satirize in *The Killer*) left a permanently sour impression on him, and since then he has worked selectively, and only with complete control, on projects about how people’s perversities are weaponized against them. 

Fincher’s surgical technique has grown ever sharper since his days directing commercials and music videos with a flashy, old Hollywood garishness. Visually, his sensibility is not unlike brutalist architecture, with the drab colors, straight lines, and tidy angles of his careful designs suddenly disrupted by moments of jagged violence and disorder. Quasi-intellectual dudecore favorites like *Se7en* and *Fight Club* established his preoccupation with a postmodern kind of moral sickness. Fincher’s characters follow the trail of psychopathy like moths to a flame, subliminally aware of their own impending destruction yet unable to curb their toxic fascinations. He also has an uncanny feel for the zeitgeist, picking projects with only the most eerily prescient of subtexts — blind consumerism in *Fight Club* and *The Killer*, true crime obsession in *Zodiac* and *Mindhunter*, techno-cultural disruption in *The Social Network*, feminist revenge in *Girl with the Dragon Tattoo*, parasocial relationships in *Gone Girl*. As more and more directors have shied away from the decidedly uncinematic present, Fincher continues to depict the solipsistic, anxiety-imbued cultural atmosphere of 21st century America with an unflinching (and unmatched) verisimilitude.

Perhaps unsurprisingly for a cold-blooded professional like Fincher, his best film (*The Social Network*) is also his least personal, while his worst films (*Mank* and *The Curious Case of Benjamin Button*) are obviously heartfelt passion projects.  
    
**STANLEY KUBRICK** (1928–1999)

**FILMS:**  1953—Fear and Desire.  1955—Killer’s Kiss.  1956—The Killing.  1957—Paths of Glory.  1960—*Spartacus*.  1962—Lolita.  1964—*Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb*.  1968—*2001: A Space Odyssey*.  1972—*A Clockwork Orange*.  1975—*Barry Lyndon*.  1980—*The Shining*.  1987—Full Metal Jacket.  1999—Eyes Wide Shut.

Despite the diversity of Kubrick’s subject matter, his films are marked by a pattern of ominous repetition.  The most alarming example is the famous sequence in THE SHINING in which Jack axes through the bathroom door, a sequence overtly staged to evoke violent rape (with the repetitive jolts of the ax splintering through the door as Wendy screams helplessly on the other side).  The scene is disturbing on a subconscious level, which is where Kubrick began to stake his claim in the late 1960s.    
If Kubrick has a grand theme, it’s probably Madness as a Logical Conclusion.  In DR. STRANGELOVE, Ripper views his insane compulsion to trigger nuclear war as an extension of his patriotic duty.  In 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, the murderous HAL 9000 computer justifies his sabotage as an extension of his programmed mission.  In A CLOCKWORK ORANGE, sadistic turnkeys and scientists attempt to “cure” Alex of his brutalistic nature, but their methods turn out to be equally brutal, driving Alex to attempt suicide.  (None of which changes his nature, anyway.)  In THE SHINING, Jack’s psychotic break manifests itself as ghosts/delusions urging him to “correct” his family out of an obligation to the Overlook Hotel.  In FULL METAL JACKET, Private Pyle is driven over the edge by the incessant abuse of the military (represented by R. Lee Ermey’s belligerent drill Sgt.), which he internalizes and eventually turns back on the man who re-programmed him.  Even Kubrick’s most villainous characters act according to a strict rationale, mad as it may seem to their victims.  However, no one in a Kubrick film (besides Ripper) simply “goes mad.”  Instead, he delves into the repetitive mechanics that lead ever-so-deliberately to madness, presenting it as the natural culmination of a mundane process.  Consider the endless steadicam takes through the Overlook Hotel corridors or the recruits’ frequent jogging in FULL METAL JACKET.  This sense of pathological fastidiousness imbues all his films and reflects the director’s own exacting methodology.    
EYES WIDE SHUT explores the ways we ritualize sex and the madness of how we reconcile its primal nature with our pretensions towards gentility.  Cruise and Kidman’s domestic argument and Cruise’s subsequent misadventures derive from their attaching such lofty significance and emotion to what is essentially an uncontrollable, animalistic impulse.  When Cruise is finally immersed in the depravity of the sexual underworld, he awakens from the insanity of that thinking.    
An underrated part of Kubrick’s legacy (and maybe this is more correlation than causation, given the timing of his rise to fame) is how he transformed the idea of what a great director’s filmography looks like.  Andrew Sarris once quipped that Kubrick made “projects, not films.”  That was a dig in 1968, expressing his impatience with the long periods between Kubrick’s pictures and dissatisfaction with the pretentious results.  Fifty years later, the Kubrick model is the platonic ideal of a top-notch filmography: All killer, no filler.  Each film viewed as both its own entity and an inseparable collection of threads in the overall tapestry of an auteur’s career.  It’s an oppressive method of evaluation on the one hand, unfairly magnifying every awkwardly edited moment, strange casting choice, or badly dated performance.  But the order and tidiness of a 13-item filmography is catnip to critical types like yours truly when it comes to analyzing directors in a comparative slash canonical way (see *Welles*, *Orson*).  The bad news for competitors is that few auteurs have the same commitment to order and tidiness that Kubrick did, and no one else has wrought so fine a tapestry.

**DAVID LYNCH** (1946–	)

**FILMS:**  1977—*Eraserhead*.  1980—*The Elephant Man*.  1984—Dune.  1986—*Blue Velvet*.  1990—*Wild at Heart*, *Twin Peaks* (six episodes).  1992—*Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me*.  1997—Lost Highway.  1999—The Straight Story.  2001—*Mulholland Drive*.  2006—Inland Empire.  2017—*Twin Peaks: The Return* (18 episodes).

The only true surrealist to crack the canon since Bunuel.  For that reason, it’s tempting to label Lynch as his descendant, but that’s not really true.  Lynch is *sui generis* in the most literal sense.  His films don’t speak the same language as the other directors in this category, but slotting him anywhere else would feel as wrong as omitting him from this endeavor entirely.  Joel Coen once described film direction as “tone management,” but Lynch (and arguably Tarantino) are the only living directors who *invented* a new tone.  Many critics have written about his distinctive contribution to the art of cinema, none more elegantly than David Foster Wallace, who credits Lynch with clarifying his vision of what the “avant-garde” could really be.  An indisputable titan of American cinema, Lynch is perhaps the most influential and yet least imitable filmmaker of the modern era.

**MARTIN SCORSESE** (1942–		)

**FILMS:**  1967—Who’s That Knocking at My Door.  1970—Street Scenes 1970\.  1972—Boxcar Bertha.  1973—*Mean Streets*.  1974—Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore, Italianamerican.  1976—*Taxi Driver*.  1977—New York, New York.  1978—*The Last Waltz* (concert film), American Boy: A Profile of Steven Prince (documentary).  1980—*Raging Bull*.  1982—The King of Comedy.  1985—After Hours.  1986—The Color of Money.  1988—*The Last Temptation of Christ*.  1990—*Goodfellas*.  1991—Cape Fear.  1993—*The Age of Innocence*.  1995—*Casino*, A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies (documentary).  1997—Kundun, My Voyage to Italy.  1999—Bringing Out the Dead.  2002—*Gangs of New York*.  2004—The Aviator.  2005—No Direction Home: Bob Dylan (documentary).  2006—*The Departed*.  2008—Shine a Light (concert film).  2010—Shutter Island, Public Speaking (documentary).  2011—Hugo, George Harrison: Living in the Material World.  2013—*The Wolf of Wall Street*.  2016—Silence.  2019—*The Irishman*, Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese.  2023—Killers of the Flower Moon.

Overpraised and under-rewarded, Scorsese is an unquestioned master of the form who is simultaneously extolled and dismissed at every turn. The somewhat chilly reception most new Scorsese films receive suggests critical fatigue. Scorsese’s influence on his profession is so ubiquitous that it’s become nearly invisible. Modern filmmakers emulate his style almost unconsciously, the same way Ford and Hawks emulated D.W. Griffith, unintentionally solidifying the language of American movies for the next half century. And if the Griffith tradition represented what we might call the cinema of objectivity, Scorsese’s style ushered in a movement toward subjectivity. Films like MEAN STREETS and TAXI DRIVER prioritized the thoughts and emotions of their protagonists to an unprecedented degree. They placed the audience squarely inside the minds of characters who a decade earlier the movies treated as moral scapegoats. That’s not to say there weren’t sympathetic movie criminals before Scorsese, but his films freed them (and us) from the movies’ torturous preoccupation with right vs wrong. We were finally allowed to acknowledge that there were far more interesting things about the lives of criminals than the moral efficacy of their behavior.

**STEVEN SPIELBERG** (1946–	)

**FILMS:**  1971—Duel.  1974—The Sugarland Express.  1975—*Jaws*.  1977—*Close Encounters of the Third Kind*.  1979—1941.  1981—*Raiders of the Lost Ark*.  1982—*E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial*.  1984—Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom.  1985—The Color Purple.  1987—*Empire of the Sun*.  1989—Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, Always.  1991—Hook.  1993—*Jurassic Park*, *Schindler’s List*.  1997—The Lost World: Jurassic Park, Amistad.  1998—*Saving Private Ryan*.  2001—A.I. Artificial Intelligence.  2002—*Minority Report*, *Catch Me If You Can*.  2004—The Terminal.  2005—*War of the Worlds*, Munich.  2008—Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.  2011—War Horse, The Adventures of Tintin.  2012—*Lincoln*.  2015—Bridge of Spies.  2016—The BFG.  2017—The Post.  2018—Ready Player One.  2021—West Side Story.  2022—The Fabelmans.

Spielberg represents the cinema of childhood wonder and naivete, with its omnipresent sense of adventure and blissful assurance that warm and fuzzy feelings will overcome even the darkest realities of human experience. The quintessential “Spielbergian” image is that of a child (or adult whose inner child has awoken) gazing up at a spectacle too wondrous for words.  The spectacle, of course, isn’t actually a dinosaur, or a UFO, or the face of God Himself, but a Spielberg movie. And the character’s awestruck reaction reflects what he wants to inspire in his audience.    
Spielberg was pegged as a preternaturally gifted technician from his earliest days in television, but technique alone doesn’t explain the level of popular success his films achieved almost immediately. *Jaws*, the first and still the best modern blockbuster, changed the business. Yet none of Spielberg’s many imitators were able to sustain his artistic legitimacy. What does it say about the paradigm of blockbuster filmmaking when over 40 years of history haven’t yielded more than a dozen blockbusters as durable as the original? And that the same handful of directors are responsible for most of them? Ever since *Jaws* became the Great White Whale/Shark of the industry, major studios have maniacally pursued its success to the form’s detriment. After all, for every Spielberg there are ten Colin Treverrows, and for every *Jurassic Park* we get fifteen *Jurassic World*s*.* In any case, Spielberg’s rapid evolution from wunderkind to household name set the stage for a tectonic shift in Hollywood’s commercial priorities. (That shift would officially arrive in 1977 with *Star Wars*, courtesy of Spielberg pal George Lucas.)    
The list of directors prematurely hailed as “the next Spielberg” includes Robert Zemeckis, Joe Dante, Colin Treverrow, Jeff Nichols, J.J. Abrams, Kevin Reynolds, and countless others. The critical intelligentsia’s eagerness to crown a new Spielberg is perhaps the strongest testament to his dominance of our cultural imagination. I’m reminded of the numerous basketball players who were hyped as “the next MJ” only for their careers to fall well short of such lofty proclamations. There will never be another MJ, just as there will never be another Spielberg.  
Depending on his material, Spielberg’s tendency to infantilize the audience can be a crucial asset or an embarrassing liability. There is a clear dichotomy between his escapist entertainments and his “serious” films. The former have their flaws, but the latter almost never satisfy. The shallow didacticism of *The Color Purple* and *Amistad*, for example, has dated like the earnest book reports of a junior high school student who’s suddenly discovered a passion for social justice. The most notable exception is *Saving Private Ryan*, which contrasted its Ford-esque sentimentality with a grisly verite approach that still connects with startling clarity.  
Part of Spielberg’s popular appeal is his American instinct to fall back on Christian themes like love and sacrifice. Not unlike Scorsese’s relationship to Catholicism, Spielberg’s relationship to Judaism has been infamously fraught with pride and prejudice. Even the conception of a film like *Schindler’s List* is, in some ways, perversely disingenuous: the titular character, who rescues some 1,200 Jews from destruction through war profiteering, is framed as a kind of capitalist Jesus. But instead of suffering for others, they do their own suffering while Schindler drinks cocktails with Nazis. To be sure, Schindler sheds a few guilty tears in the end, but the survivors never begrudge his urge to remain as wealthy as possible. (Needless to say, the parallels between Schindler and Spielberg aren’t particularly flattering, which is partly what makes it such a fascinatingly self-flagellating project.) In the meantime, the neverending nightmare of life in the concentration camp becomes so gratuitous and the Fiennes character so cartoonishly evil that the gravity of the situation grows precarious.  The Holocaust was certainly evil, but Spielberg sees it as a theme park ride, with all the brutality and none of the mundanity. To that end, shooting it like a documentary, while a logical choice, is perhaps more insidious than Spielberg and cinematographer Jaunsz Kaminski intended. Their collaboration 12 years later would yield a superior Holocaust film in *War of the Worlds*, which depicted its horror through subtext rather than onanistic reenactment.    
It’s worth noting that only John Ford, Victor Fleming, and Spielberg have had two films from the same year inducted to the National Film Registry.      

**QUENTIN TARANTINO** (1963–	)

**FILMS:**  1992—*Reservoir Dogs*.  1994—*Pulp Fiction*.  1995—Four Rooms (Segment: “The Man from Hollywood”).  1997—*Jackie Brown*.  2003—*Kill Bill: Volume 1*.  2004—*Kill Bill: Volume 2*.  2007—Death Proof.  2009—*Inglourious Basterds*.  2012—Django Unchained.  2015—The Hateful Eight.  2019—*Once Upon a Time in Hollywood*. 

Tarantino’s grand theme is the transformation of culture through its creation. QTs movies are postmodern syntheses of pop culture, but they amount to more than mere collage. His movies explore how pop culture formulates our moral and philosophical beliefs and attitudes, and how through the movies we can challenge and transform history itself.  
As a film historian, QT is keenly aware of how his legacy might be damaged by volume, and he’s declared he’ll direct no more than ten films. So far, his gambit has worked. There might be a boring moment somewhere in his filmography, but damned if I can think of one. The most popular of the postmodernists, Tarantino is frequently able to overcome his more juvenile inclinations as a writer through the sheer effortlessness of his instincts as an entertainer.  Even when QT’s movies fail creatively, they almost never fail *sensually*. Like any expert confectioner, QT knows how to reliably deliver a sweet, sinful creation with visual flair and lighter than air...as long as you’re okay dining on a lot of empty calories. Owes a lot more to Peter Bogdanovich than he probably realizes.  
